a priority
Queue is a special type of Queue in which each
element is associated with the priority value and elements are
served on the basis of their priority
That is higher
Priority elements are served first
For example let us take this queue in the case
of the normal que
The first inserted will be removed first as it follows
the first in first out principal
So when we call deque function element
One will be removed first and then Element eight and
then five and so on but in priority
Queue
Each element is associated with the priority
Based on the priority the elements will be removed
Generally the value of the element itself is considered as
priority
For example the element with highest value is considered the
highest priority element
Here
element 10 is the highest priority element
So when we call the deque function instead of
the first inserted element one the highest priority element 10
will be removed
First if we call deque function again Element eight
will be removed from the queue and then element six
and so on here
The important thing to notice
We can set the priority based on our needs
For example in the above case we consider the element
with highest value as the high priority element
We can also assume the element with lowest value as
the highest priority
If that is the case when we call deque
function element one will be removed first
As it is the lowest value and then element
five and then element six and so on
So this is all about the priority
Queue
Now let us learn how to implement a priority
What will be the best data structure to implement priority
Queue
In other words which Data structure is best to find
The case Smallest and largest elements in the Given set
it is the heap data structure because in heap
data structure after the build heap process the highest or
lowest element will be present at the top and we
can continuously extract the smallest to largest elements effectively
In the case of Max Heap the highest element will
be present at the top in priority
Queue
We can use the Max heap when highest values considered
the highest priority element and in case of min heap
the lowest element will be present at the top
so in priority
Queue
We can use the min heap when the lowest values
considered the highest priority element
We have already learned about heap data structure in data
Structure series
We will attach those videos below to this kindly go
through all videos to understand how heap data structure
works
After that we will learn how to implement priority
Queue
Using Heap data structure.